# cif_evolution

Results
Distribution of cif genes in non-Wolbachia symbionts
The genomic analysis of representative non-Wolbachia maternally inherited symbionts and their close relatives revealed a scattered distribution of both cifA and cifB genes across bacterial phylogeny. Among the 762 non-Wolbachia bacterial genomes analyzed in this study, cif genes were identified in 64 (8.40%) of them (Table S1). Within the cif-positive genomes, both cifA and cifB were co-detected in 60 genomes (93.75%), predominantly organized in an operon structure (see below). In contrast, only four genomes (6.25%) contain a cifB gene copy without any evidence of cifA. In genomes of non-Wolbachia bacteria, the number of cif operon copies per cif-positive genome ranges from one (54 out of 60 cif-positive genomes, 90%) to two (5/60, 8.33%) with the exception of Rickettsia hoogstraalii (strain RCCE3), which carried five distinct operon copies.

The distribution of cif genes shows significant variation across examined genomes of non-Wolbachia bacteria, reflecting both the nature of interactions with arthropod hosts and the underlying bacterial phylogeny. Specifically, we analyzed genomes of obligate symbionts (n=276), which are essential for the survival or reproduction of their arthropod hosts, facultative symbionts (n=196), which are not critical for arthropod survival or reproduction, their relatives that cause diseases in vertebrates and are transmitted by arthropod vectors (n=217), and their relatives of other or unknown phenotypes (n=73) (Table S1). In this context, cif genes are significantly more prevalent in facultative symbionts (34 out of 196 genomes, 17.35%) compared to obligate symbionts (0/276, 0%; Fisher’s exact tests, p < 10-12) and bacteria causing diseases in vertebrates (21/217, 9.68%; p = 0.03) (Figure 1A). In this latter group, the presence of cif genes is limited to the scrub typhus agent Orientia tsutsugamushi, which is also associated with arthropods as it utilizes Trombidiformes mites as vectors (Table S1). Indeed, no cif operon has been identified in other examined pathogenic species associated with arthropods, such as R. prowazekii, the causative agent of epidemic typhus transmitted by lice, or R. rickettsii and R. conorii, responsible for Rocky Mountain spotted fever and Mediterranean spotted fever, respectively, both transmitted by ticks (Table S1). However, unlike R. prowazekii, R. rickettsii, and R. conorii, which rely predominantly on horizontal transmission, O. tsutsugamushi is also maintained in arthropod populations through transovarial transmission, with rates close to 100%, ensuring its persistence across generations (phasomkusolsil et al, 2009). Interestingly, cif genes exhibit a similar prevalence in facultative symbionts and bacteria with other or unknown phenotypes (9/73, 12.33%; p = 0.36). Notably, cif genes are found in bacteria with intermediate phenotypes (categorized in Table S1 under the ‘other phenotypes’ group), such as Rickettsia xxx and R. xxx  , which are maternally inherited in ticks (refs) but also cause opportunistic infections in humans (ref). This pattern suggests that the presence of cif genes is specifically linked to maternal (transovarial) transmission in arthropods, as no bacterium associated with arthropods but relying predominantly on horizontal (infectious) transmission harbors cif genes (Table S1).

The genomes of representative non-Wolbachia maternally inherited symbionts and their close relatives examined here span 31 genera across three bacterial phyla, six classes, and at least nine orders and 11 families (as some Betaproteobacteria are not yet assigned to specific orders and families; Figure 1A, Table S1). However, cif genes are more prevalent within the α-proteobacterium class (56 out of 362 genomes, 15.47%) compared to other bacterial class (β-proteobacterium: 0/35, 0%, γ-proteobacterium: 4/281, 1.42%, Mollicutes: 2/33, 6.06%; Fisher’s exact tests, all p < 0.03) except for Bacteroidota (2/33, 6.06%;, p = 0.20). Specifically, in the α-proteobacteria, evidence of cif genes was commonly found in five genera within the Rickettsiales order: Rickettsia (25/151 genomes), Orientia (21/24), Tisiphia (7/31), Mesenet (2/2), and Occidentia (1/1). They were also detected in other bacterial taxa, including γ-proteobacteria with Legionellales (genus Rickettsiella: 4/17), Mollicutes with Mycoplasmatales (Spiroplasma: 2/33), and Bacteroidota with Sphingobacteriales (Cardinium: 2/14). No cif genes were identified in other bacterial genera harboring maternally inherited symbionts (Table S1). Additionally, no cif genes were detected in members of the Anaplasma (0/52) and Ehrlichia (0/38) genera, which are disease-causing agents transmitted by ticks, despite their close phylogenetic relationship to Wolbachia in the Anaplasmataceae family (Figure 1A). Since Anaplasma and Ehrlichia bacteria are not maternally inherited in ticks, their lack of cif genes aligns with the observed absence of these genes in arthropod-associated bacteria that rely exclusively on horizontal transmission.

Regarding host taxonomy, non-Wolbachia cif genes were commonly found in bacteria associated with Trombiniformes mites (with Orientia), ticks (associated with Rickettsia, Occidentia, and Rickettsiella), and Coleoptera (with Rickettsia, Tisiphia, and Mesenet) (Figure 1B). Notably, ticks exhibited an important diversity of Rickettsia species and strains carrying cif genes (16/96 genomes; Table S1). To a lesser extent, cif genes were identified in non-Wolbachia symbionts hosted by other arachnids (Araneae, Sarcoptiformes), insects (Diptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, Psocodea), as well as crustaceans (Amphipoda, Isopoda), and in metagenome-assembled sequences derived from environmental DNA (eDNA), potentially originating from remnants of arthropods.

Polymorphism dynamics of toxins and other domains in cif operons
Both cifA and cifB genes show important variation in amino acid sequence length, nature and number of their structural domains (Figure 2, Figure S1). Phylogenetic analysis, encompassing all non-Wolbachia cif-positive symbionts alongside representative Wolbachia strains, identified 11 distinct clades of cif genes. Ten of these clades align with the previously characterized I-to-X cif types described (Tan et al. 2024; Martinez2021, 2022), but we also detected a novel robust clade, which we provisionally designated as type XI. Most cif types formed monophyletic clades, with the exception of cif type IV, which appeared paraphyletic. Additionally, the subclade containing R. gravesii and other three Rickettsia undetermined species, which was primarily associated with type IX (Tan et al. 2024), could instead be reassigned to type X. A significant correlation was found across cif types between total operon length and the number of predicted domains, with a plateau for values higher than ca. 4,000 amino acids with eight or more domains (Polynomial regression analysis based on LOESS values, Adjusted R² = 0.98, p < 0.0001, Figure S2A). Furthermore, both the number and composition of domains were significantly associated with cif type (Kruskal-Wallis, p < 0.0001, PERMANOVA, p < 0.0001, respectively).

Wolbachia displayed the greatest diversity of cif types, encompassing 8 of the 11 types. Rickettsia and Tisiphia harbored 4 and 3 types, respectively. Rickettsiella cif operons were restricted to type IX, alongside a small number of Wolbachia cif operons, while all Orientia cif operons were confined to a subclade within type X, which otherwise included cif operons from Rickettsia and Tisiphia. Spiroplasma cif operons grouped with Wolbachia cif type III. The two orphan cifB genes from Cardinium (without associated cifA) cluster into types VI and X (Figure S1).
The cifA gene copies have an average length of 595 amino acids (from 359 to 867) and universally contain RNA-binding-like domains (Figure 2). An additional domain, the apoptosis regulator-like domain, is only present in cifA types I–VIII and XI, suggesting it was acquired secondarily by the common ancestral cifA sequences of these types. In contrast, the cifB gene copies exhibit greater polymorphism, both in sequence length (ranging from 696 to 5,065 amino acids, with an average of 2,073 amino acids) and in protein domain composition. The two conserved PD-(D/E)XK nuclease domains are stably maintained across the cifB phylogeny and are associated with an AAA-ATPase-like domain, consistent with observations in Wolbachia (Martinez et al 2020) and, more broadly, in bacteria (Knizewski et al., 2007). However, cifB types V–VIII exhibit significantly greater domain polymorphism than other types (Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn's post hoc tests for multiple comparisons, with FDR correction, p < 0.0001). In types I and V–X, protein domain arrangements are predominantly localized to the C-terminal region, with the exception of the N-terminal OTU-like cysteine protease. Frequently occurring cifB domains included Pore-forming toxin TcdA/B (36/111), Latrotoxin (33/111), Ankyrin repeats (32/111), DUF3491 (28/111), Deubiquitinase DUB (27/111), and RTX toxin (22/111) (Table S2). Ankyrin repeat domains can extend beyond 2,000 amino acids in length and are frequently associated with various toxin modules, including Pore-forming TcdA/TcdB, salivary gland toxins, RTX toxins, and Latrotoxins. None of the cif domains is exclusive to Wolbachia operons, as all were also found in association with other bacteria, such as the Deubiquitinase (DUB) domain, which occurs in Wolbachia, Mesenet, Rickettsia, and Tisiphia (Figure 2, Table S3). More broadly, the abundance of cif domains does not significantly differ between Wolbachia operons and those of other bacteria harboring cif genes (Fisher's exact tests, all p > 0.05), with the exception of DUF3491, which is more common in Rickettsia operons compared to Wolbachia operons (p = 0.02).

The phylogenetic analysis of the cif operon indicated multiple independent events of acquisition and loss of C-terminal domains, even for operons of the same cif type. Independent phylogenies of each predicted domain revealed that most domains cluster according to cif types (Figure S3), indicating a shared evolutionary trajectory among the domains. However, we identified repeated phylogenetic incongruences for specific domains: (i) the Pore-forming toxin TcdA/TcdB, which diverges in cif type V, VI, VIII, IX and X; (ii) the DUB domain, specific to type V; and (iii) the Latrotoxin domain, specific to type IX. These patterns suggest multiple instances of intra-gene recombination events between distantly related cifB genes.

Predicted functionality of the cif operon in CI induction
Among the 107 operons analysed, 85 contain intact cifA and cifB coding sequences without internal mutations that could disrupt their functionality. These intact sequences are present in Wolbachia (31/38), Orientia (19/21), Rickettsia (19/32), Tisiphia (7/7), Mesenet (4/4), Rickettsiella (2/2),  Spiroplasma (2/2), and Occidentia (1/1) (Figure 2). Conversely, mutations introducing internal stop codons are present in the remaining 22 operons, primarily in Wolbachia, Rickettsia and Orientia. Of these, five operons exhibit mutations in both cifA and cifB, while 15 show mutations exclusively in cifB. Although these mutations could potentially disrupt cif functionality, they were observed in the Rickettsia rNten strain (Figure 2), which induce nonetheless complete CI (Owashi2024). As these mutations are not located within cif domains, their ability to induce CI may still be preserved. Additionally, truncated cifB genes were identified in Rickettsia (4/32), where cifB sequences completely lack the C-terminal PD-(D/E)XK nuclease (Figure S1, Table S2). This likely leads to the production of an incomplete protein with the loss of a part of the catalytic site.

Further analysis of cifB amino acid sequences highlights the potential of non-Wolbachia symbionts to induce CI via two distinct mechanisms utilized by Wolbachia, each involving different cifB domains. The first CI mechanism depends on the DNase activity of the PD-(D/E)XK nuclease domains, which requires three critical catalytic residues (D–E–K) present in both the N- and C-terminal domains (Chen et al., 2019; Beckmann, 2019). Our findings confirm the high conservation of these catalytic residues within the N-terminal PD-(D/E)XK nuclease domains across types II-X (Figure S4). In the C-terminal domains, these residues are largely preserved across types, except in some type X cif operons, where lysine (K) is substituted with glycine (G) or alanine (A) (Figure 2, Figure S4, TableS2). Notably, these preserved N-and C-termini catalytic residues are identified in cifB sequences of Rickettsia (21/32), Tisiphia (6/7), Mesenet (4/4), Rickettsiella (4/4), Spiroplasma (2/2), and Occidentia (1/1), alongside those of Wolbachia (Figure 2A).

The second CI mechanism, currently identified only in Wolbachia Cif I type, involves a DUB CI-inducer domain that removes ubiquitin from proteins (Beckmann et al., 2017; Beckmann, Sharma, et al., 2019). However, the DUB domain is found in cif types I, V, VI, VII, and, to a lesser extent, type X. It is frequently associated with Rickettsia (10/32), Tisiphia (3/7), Mesenet (2/4),Occidentia (1/1) and Cardinium (1/2) cifB sequences (although in the latter case, no associated cifA is present), as well as those of Wolbachia (Figure 2, Figure S1, TableS3). Notably, DUB domains often occur alongside functional DNase activity in some Wolbachia, Mesenet, Rickettsia, Tisiphia and Occidentia cifB, suggesting that the DUB and PD-(D/E)XK nuclease activities may act synergistically to induce CI (Figure 2A). However, in type X, certain cifB genes from Rickettsia, Tisiphia, and Orientia exhibit (i) incomplete catalytic pathways required for DNase activity and (ii) an absence of the DUB domain.

Genomic environments of cif operons
A representative subset of 78 cif operons was examined for their genomic location (e.g., cif genes located on unassembled contigs of lower size were excluded from the analysis), revealing that 36 are located on main bacterial chromosomes (for Wolbachia, Rickettsia, Tisiphia, and Orientia), 4 on plasmids (Rickettsia and Tisiphia), and 38 on unassembled large contigs not assigned to a chromosome or a plasmid (Figure 2B). The direct genetic composition of cif flanking regions is both correlated with cif types and bacterial genera (230=70.82, 215=102.68, Chi-square test, all p-value ≤0.0002, Figures 2C, Figure 3A-D, Figure 4A-E). Notably, 9 out of the 10 cif type V operons in Rickettsia and Tisiphia are located upstream of an RTX-like T1SS, which comprises two ABC transporters and a membrane fusion protein, a genetic feature absent in other cif types (Figures 3A and S7). Although cif type plays a role in shaping the genetic composition of cif flanking regions, bacterial genus has an even greater influence, as indicated by higher Cramér’s V values (0.67 vs 0.56). This suggests that genomic constraints tied to bacterial genera, rather than cif types, drive the organization of flanking regions, as exemplified by Wolbachia and Rickettsiaceae.. Indeed, the majority of Wolbachia cif operons examined (26/32) are located either within or in close association with WO prophages or WO-like genomic islands (Figure 4A, 4E), as previously documented (Lepage et al., 2017; Bordenstein 2022; Vancaester 2023; Martinez2022; Tan 2024). Notably, Wolbachia cif operons are inserted in eukaryotic-associated modules (EAM), a specialized region of WO prophages strongly linked to, but evolutionarily independent from, the WO core structural genes (e.g., head, tail, replication, repair, connector, baseplate) (Bordenstein 2016; Bordenstein 2022). Similar pattern were observed for the Mesenet cif operons (4/4), which are also associated with WO prophages (Figure 4A, 4E).

Conversely, we found no evidence of WO prophage genes associated with cif operons for the other non-Wolbachia genomes. Instead, we detected other types of mobile genetic elements associated with cif operons in members of the Rickettsiaceae family, specifically in Rickettsia (27/28 cif-positive genomes), Tisiphia (5/6), and Orientia (4/5), as well as in the Amoebophilaceae family with the Cardinium genus (1/1) (Figure 3A-D, Figure 4B-E). In Occidentia and Spiroplasma, the physical association between cif operons and mobile genetic elements has not been formally determined, as these elements are located on unassembled too short contigs. However, in cif-positive genomes of Rickettsia, Tisiphia, and Orientia, these mobile genetic elements frequently correspond to conjugative elements known as Rickettsia Amplified Genetic Elements (RAGE, Figure 3A-D, Figure 4B), previously identified in some Rickettsiaceae genomes (Gillespie 2012, Gillespie 2014, Giengkam et al. 2023, Lehman et al. 2024). RAGE are primarily organized into two main components: (i) The mobilization module, which includes F- and Ti-type Type IV Secretion System (T4SS) genes (Tra genes), and (ii) The cargo module, responsible for transferring closely linked genes within or between genomes through recombination and genomic rearrangements (Figure 3E) (Giengkam 2023).

RAGE and cif operons are commonly associated in Rickettsiaceae genomes. Among the 38 cif operons of Rickettsiaceae with large flanking regions available, 26 (68.4%, spanning cif types V, VII, XI, and X) are adjacent to RAGE or RAGE-like islands (Figure 3, Figure 4B). Of these 26 cif operons, 16 (61.5%) are located within complete RAGE elements, which include F-T4SS mobilization genes and cargo-associated genes (e.g., TPR, SpoT, and leucine-rich ORFs). Notably, eight cif operons are embedded within the cargo block, positioned between the relaxosome Ti-T4SS genes (TraA1 and TraD Ti-like) and cargo genes (e.g., R. hoogstraalii CS, R. heilongjiangensis TIGMIC, Tisiphia isolate 54722). The sizes of complete RAGE elements vary substantially, ranging from 26,082 bp (R. amblyommatis strains) to 184,626 bp (Rickettsia isolate 54719), with the largest size due to the duplication of a 48,579 bp RAGE block containing a cif operon (Figure S6B). Furthermore, 10 cif operons (38.5%) of Rickettsiaceae are located in RAGE-like islands, which are interspersed with Tra genes and additional small mobile genetic elements (SMGE). In Orientia, the genomic context of cif operons varies by strain. They may be found within RAGE (e.g., strains Boryong and Ikeda), within RAGE-like islands (e.g., strain FPW1038), or flanked by two or three RAGE elements without being part of the cargo (e.g., strain Karp) (Figure S5).

We also identified SMGE closed to cif operon, such as transposases, recombinases, integrases or retrotransposases (eg., maturases involved in the processing of group II intron-like retroelements). In some cases, SMGE were adjacent to cif operon inside RAGE (2/11, 18%) and WO prophages (20/27, 74%) (Figure 4A-B). We identified an extreme case of duplication of a full transposase-covered fragment flanked by two identical integrases within the same RAGE in Rickettsia of P. tereticollis isolate 54719. (Figure S6A). In other cases, SMGEs were the only mobile genetic elements associated with cif operons, as observed in both Rickettsiaceae (10/39), Wolbachia (5/32) and Cardinium (1/1), where no traces of RAGE or WO prophage genes were detected in the vicinity of the cif operons (e.g., Wolbachia wIrr, Rickettsia rNten, Tisiphia isolate 54743; Figures 4C, 4E, S6B, and S7). 

In rare instances (6/78), cif operons were located in genomic environments apparently devoid of mobile genetic elements, as observed in Rickettsia oklahomensis strain Oklahoma-10, Tisiphia strain Pante 1, Rickettsiella isopodorum, Rickettsiella sp. strain Opha and Rickettsiella strain ETS170220_bin_92 (Figure 4D-E). However, for R. oklahomensis strain Oklahoma-10 and Tisiphia strain Pante 1, traces of RAGE were detected elsewhere in their genomes, suggesting potential genomic rearrangements that may have relocated the cif operons away from the original RAGE context. 

Lateral transfers and recombination of cif operons across symbionts
Phylogenetic reconstructions revealed that distantly related bacteria can harbor the same cif types, while bacteria of the same genus may possess distantly related operons (Figure 2). Notably, although nearly all non-Wolbachia cif operons clustered within types V-to-X, two Spiroplasma cif operons grouped with Wolbachia cif type III. Additionally, as Wolbachia cif operons belong to 8 types, some cluster with cif operons of distantly related symbionts, Rickettsia and Tisiphia with types V and XI. While Rickettsiella cif operons were restricted to type IX, they cluster with some Wolbachia cif operons. Type X also include Rickettsia, Tisiphia and Orientia cif operons.

As repeated lateral gene transfers have been identified as key drivers of cif distribution across Wolbachia strains (Lepage et al 2017, Cooper et al 2019, Martinez et al 2022, Tan et al., 2024), we extended the analysis to the Rickettsiaceae family, a group where cif operons are abundant (Figure 5). Strikingly, the presence of cif genes was not constrained by Rickettsiaceae phylogeny (Mantel test, p-value XXX), and no specific Rickettsiaceae taxa consistently harbored similar cif operons, except Orientia which only harbor type X cif genes (Figure S5). These findings highlight a complex dynamic of cif operon losses and gains mediated by both stable vertical inheritance through cladogenesis and horizontal gene transfer. Comparing the Rickettsiaceae pangenome phylogeny with cif type distribution revealed a patchy occurrence of cif operon types across six of the ten major Rickettsia groups (Spotted Fever, Scapularis, Transitional, Canadensis, Belli, and Rhyzobius), as well as in its sister genus Tisiphia and the basal Rickettsiaceae genera Occidentia and Orientia. While distinct strains within the same bacterial species often shared identical cif operon types (e.g., Rickettsia amblyommatis strains and O. tsutsugamushi strains), other species exhibited polymorphism in cif operon presence or absence (R. heilongjiangensis strains, R. felis strains) or variation in cif operon types among strains (R. hoogstraalii CS strain with type V, RCCE3 strain with type X, and Croatia strain with no cif operon). Conversely, distantly related species could harbor highly similar or even identical cif operons (R. hoogstraalii CS strain and R. heilongjiangensis TIGMIC strain), a pattern suggestive of lateral cif transfers.

Genomic architecture analyses revealed that, rarely, lateral transfers of cif operons across unrelated bacteria are associated with the co-transfer of the mobile genetic elements in which they are embedded. For instance, two distantly related Rickettsia species from distinct clades, R. hoogstraalii CS (Transitional group) and R. heilongjiangensis TIGMIC (Spotted Fever group), share identical cif operons embedded within an identical 51,574 bp RAGE, suggesting that the entire RAGE was exchanged between these two bacteria (Figure S6B). However, we do not found correlation between phylogenies of RAGEs and WO prophages  and cif operon trees (Mantel test, all p-value > 0.13), indicating that, while physically associated with cif operons, RAGEs and WO prophages exhibit – in most cases - independant evolutionary dynamics (Figures 6A, 6B). Consequently, cif operons display evolutionary trajectories independent of the RAGEs or WO prophages in which they are inserted. This results in closely related cif operons being associated with distantly related RAGEs (e.g., for cif type V) or WO prophages (e.g., for cif type I). However, in Wolbachia, the prophage srWO3 (shared between Wolbachia supergroups A and B) appears to serve as a preferential site for hosting cif operons (Figure 6B).

Additionally, cif operons are frequently associated with a specific group of transposons containing PD-(D/E)XK nuclease family transposase domains, briefly called PDDEXK2 transposase (Figure 7). These transposons are widespread across the Wolbachia, Mesenet, Rickettsia, Occidentia, Orientia, Tisiphia, and Cardinium genomes analyzed in this study, occurring in both chromosomal and plasmid contexts, within RAGE or WO environments. Phylogenetic analysis revealed two major clades, each comprising transposons from different bacterial genera, suggesting multiple horizontal transfer events both within and between families (Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmataceae), as well as across genera. A notable proportion of these transposons are recurrently associated with cif operons. Specifically, in 54 out of 95 cif-containing genomic environments (56.8%), at least one of these transposons was found within 40,000 bp of a cif operon. The median distance between these elements and cif operons was 6,355 bp in Anaplasmataceae (Wolbachia and Mesenet) and 9,749 bp in Rickettsiaceae (Rickettsia, Tisiphia, and Orientia). We found a significant correlation between cif operons and PDDEXK2 transposon phylogenies (Mantel test, R = 0.59, p-value = 0.0001), notably for cif types I and VII. However, their association is not strict, as many PDDEXK2 transposons lack cif operons.

